# Distinct Features of the Regenerating Teleost Heart Uncovered Through Comparative Single-Cell Profiling

Clayton M. Carey, Hailey L. Hollins, Alexis V. Schmid1, and James A. Gagnon

Adult humans respond to heart injury by forming a permanent scar, yet other vertebrates are capable of robust and complete cardiac regeneration. Despite progress towards characterizing the mechanisms of cardiac regeneration in fish and amphibians, the large evolutionary gulf between mammals and regenerating vertebrates complicates deciphering which cellular and molecular features truly enable regeneration. To better define these features, we compared cardiac injury responses in zebrafish and medaka, two teleost fish species with differing regenerative abilities, but similar anatomy and relatively recent common ancestry. We used single-cell transcriptional profiling to create a time-resolved comparative cell atlas of injury responses in all major cardiac cell types across both species. With this approach, we identified several key features that distinguish cardiac injury response in the non-regenerating medaka ventricle. By examining immune cell behaviors, we identify altered cell recruitment and a distinct pro-inflammatory gene program in medaka leukocytes, and an absence of the injury-induced interferon response seen in zebrafish. In addition, we find a lack of pro-regenerative signals including nrg1 and retinoic acid from medaka endothelial and epicardial cells. Finally, we identify significant alterations in the myocardial structure in medaka, where they lack embryonic-like primordial layer cardiomyocytes, and fail to employ a cardioprotective gene program shared by regenerating vertebrates. Together, these findings provide new insights on the dynamic evolution of vertebrate regenerative capabilities.
